python : Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20119 for key /MediaBox
At line:1 char:1
+ python -c "
+ ~~~~~~~~~~~
    + CategoryInfo          : NotSpecified: (Multiple defini...r key /MediaBox:String) [], RemoteException
    + FullyQualifiedErrorId : NativeCommandError
 
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x203e0 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20652 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x207e4 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20983 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20b1a for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20ccc for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x20e66 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x21015 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x211c4 for key /MediaBox
Multiple definitions in dictionary at byte 0x2146e for key /MediaBox
=== PAGE 1 ===
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 24 April 2020
doi: 10.3389/frai.2020.00022
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 1 April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 22Editedby:
ShathaQamhiehHashem,
An-NajahNationalUniversity,Palestine
Reviewedby:
AudriusKabasinskas,
KaunasUniversityofTechnology,
Lithuania
JirakomSirisrisakulchai,
ChiangMaiUniversity,Thailand
*Correspondence:
PaoloGiudici
paolo.giudici@unipv.it
PaoloPagnottoni
paolo.pagnottoni01@
universitadipavia.it
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
ArtiﬁcialIntelligenceinFinance,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinArtiﬁcialIntelligence
Received: 06November2019
Accepted: 24March2020
Published: 24April2020
Citation:
GiudiciP,PagnottoniPandPolinesiG
(2020)NetworkModelstoEnhance
AutomatedCryptocurrencyPortfolio
Management.Front.Artif.Intell.3:22.
doi:10.3389/frai.2020.00022Network Models to Enhance
Automated Cryptocurrency Portfolio
Management
PaoloGiudici1*,PaoloPagnottoni1*andGloriaPolinesi2
1DepartmentofEconomicsandManagement,UniversityofPavi a,Pavia,Italy,2DepartmentofEconomicsandSocial
Sciences,UniversitáPolitecnicadelleMarche,Ancona,Ita ly
The usage of cryptocurrencies, together with that of ﬁnanci al automated consultancy,
is widely spreading in the last few years. However, automate d consultancy services are
not yet exploiting the potentiality of this nascent market, which represents a class of
innovativeﬁnancialproductsthatcanbeproposedbyrobo-a dvisors.Forthisreason,we
proposeanovelapproachtobuildefﬁcientportfolioalloca tionstrategiesinvolvingvolatile
ﬁnancialinstruments,suchascryptocurrencies.Inotherw ords,wedevelopanextension
of the traditional Markowitz model which combines Random Ma trix Theory and network
measures, in order to achieve portfolio weights enhancing p ortfolios’ risk-return proﬁles.
The results show that overall our model overperforms severa l competing alternatives,
maintaining a relatively low level of risk.
Keywords: cryptocurrencies, correlation networks, netwo rk centrality, portfolio optimization, random matrix
theory, minimal spanning tree
1. INTRODUCTION
FinTech innovations are rapidly expanding nowadays, with applic ations including payments,
lending,insuranceandassetmanagement,amongothers.Two technicalreportsfromtheFinancial
Stability Board (FSB) ( FSB, 2017a,b )—establish several key drivers for FinTech, i.e., the shif t of
consumer preferences on the demand side, the change of ﬁnanci al regulations on the supply side
andthetechnologyevolution.
Inthiscontext,servicesofautomatedﬁnancialconsulting arewidelyspreadingand,inparticular
robo-advisors1.Theyaresupposedtomatchtheinvestors’riskproﬁlewithspeci ﬁcclassofﬁnancial
assets and thereby build an eﬃcient portfolio allocation for e ach speciﬁc client. However, the
mechanisms underlying the portfolio construction are often obscure, as well as they arguably do
not properly take into account for multivariate dependencies a cross securities which are key to
achievediversiﬁcationand,therefore,mitigateﬁnancial risk.Thisisparticularlytruewhendealing
with peculiarly volatile markets, such as the cryptocurrency one, which could be one of the future
targetmarketofrobo-advisors,givenitsrapidlygrowingin ﬂuenceintheﬁnancialworld.
Indeed, after its introduction by Nakamoto (2008) , Bitcoin was launched online in 2009 and
paved the way for many other cryptocurrencies. As a matter of fa ct, as of 17 October 2019, the
cryptocurrencymarketcapitalizationamountsto ∼220billionUSD,withadailytradingvolumeof
roughly52billionUSD.
Alongwithdescriptiveandqualitativestudies,manyresearc hesdealtwithquantitativeanalysis
appliedtothecryptocurrencymarket.Inparticular,astreamof researchfocusesonpricediscovery
on Bitcoin markets, aiming to determine which are the leader s and followers of the Bitcoin
1An article published on “Statista” in 2019 states that assets und er management in the robo-advisory segment amounts to
roughly 981 billion USD, as well as that they are expected to grow at an an nual growth rate (CAGR 2019–2023) of 27%
(source:https://www.statista.com/outlook/337/100/robo-a dvisors/worldwide).

=== PAGE 2 ===
Giudici et al. Network Automated Cryptocurrency Portfolio Management
price formation process (see Brandvold et al., 2015; Pagnottoni
andDimpﬂ,2018;GiudiciandAbu-Hashish,2019 ).Otherrelated
researches studied the interconnectedness and spillover in t he
cryptocurrency market (such as Corbet et al., 2018b; Giudici
and Pagnottoni, 2019a,b ). Another important area regards the
study of Bitcoin derivatives—i.e., options and futures writ ten on
Bitcoin, with studies conducted by Corbet et al. (2018a) ,Baur
and Dimpﬂ (2019) ,Giudici and Polinesi (2019) , andPagnottoni
(2019).
From a methodological viewpoint, we base our analysis on
an important stream of literature, which focuses on stock and
ﬁnancial networks built on correlation matrices. The semin al
paper by Mantegna (1999) uses correlation matrices to infer
the hierarchical structure of stock markets, deriving a dis tance
measurebasedoncorrelationmatricesandbuildingthesocal led
MinimalSpanningTree(MST),agraphicalrepresentationableto
connectassetswhicharesimilarintermsofreturnsinapairw ise
manner. After that, a research by Tola et al. (2008) uses the
Random Matrix Theory (RMT) together with several clustering
techniques and show that this signiﬁcantly lowers portfolio
risks. Subsequently, other papers about portfolio constructi on
involving the network structure of ﬁnancial assets followed (see
Zhan et al., 2015; León et al., 2017; Raﬃnot, 2017; Ren et al.,
2017).
To the best of our knowledge, there are no papers yet
that exploit network topologies to build portfolios composed
by cryptocurrencies. We ﬁll this gap proposing a model that
exploits the network structure of cryptocurrencies to provide
a portfolio asset allocation that well compares with traditio nal
ones. Following Mantegna (1999) we use Markowitz’ asset
allocation as a benchmark, and we check whether our proposal
isabletoimproveonit,intermsofrisk/returnproﬁle.
Indeed, the originality of the current paper is 2-fold. From
a methodological point of view, we improve the traditional
(Markowitz,1952 )portfolioallocationstrategybymeansofRMT
and MST and by taking network centralities speciﬁcally into
account. Moreover, throughout this technique we are able to s et
a parameter of systemic risk aversion that investors can tune
to better match their investment strategies with their own r isk
proﬁle.Fromanempiricalviewpoint,weapplyourmethodology
to data coming from a nascent and highly volatile market, i.e .,
the cryptocurrency one. This is particularly interesting, as the
cryptocurrencymarketisrapidlyexpandinganditsopportunitie s
due to the high uncertainty (and volatility) around it are qu ite
appealing,andthusagreaternumberofinvestorswilllikelyen ter
itintheshortrun.
Our empirical ﬁndings conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of our
model in achieving better cumulative portfolio performances ,
while keeping a relatively low level of risk. In particular, we
show that our proposed model which employs RMT, MST and
centrality measures rapidly adapts to market conditions, and
is able to yield satisfactory performances during bull marke t
periods. During bear market periods—instead—our Network
Markowitz model employing RMT and MST realizes the best
performances, protecting investors from relatively high los ses
which are instead generated by many other asset allocation
strategies tested. Furthermore, the riskiness of our strat egy isstill lower than most of the competing model we analyze.
These outcomes suggest that a sound combination of the
proposed models should be employed in order to achieve
an eﬃcient cryptocurrency allocation strategy, which could b e
also used as robo-advisory toolboxes to improve automated
ﬁnancialconsultancy.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our
methodology and, particularly, the Random Matrix Theory, th e
MinimalSpanningTreeandtheportfolioconstruction.Section3
illustratesourempiricalresults.Section4concludes.
2. METHODOLOGY
2.1. Random Matrix Theory
Random Matrix Theory (RMT) is widely employed in several
ﬁelds,suchasquantummechanics( Beenakker,1997 ),condensed
matter physics ( Guhr et al., 1998 ), wireless communications
(Tulino et al., 2004 ), as well as economics and ﬁnance ( Potters
et al., 2005 ). This technique is able to remove the noise
component from the pure signal which is embedded into
correlationmatrices.
The algorithm tests subsequent empirical eigenvalues of the
correlation matrix: λk< λk+1;k=1,...,n, against the null
hypothesis that they are equal to the eigenvalues of a random
Wishart matrix R=1
TAATof the same size, being AaN×T
matrix containing Ntime series of length T. The elements of A
arei.i.d.randomvariables,withzeromeanandunitvariance.
Marchenko and Pastur (1967) show that as N→ ∞and
T→ ∞,andtheratio Q=T
N≥1isﬁxed,thereisconvergence
ofthesampleeigenvalues’densityto:
f(λ)=T
2π/radicalbig
(λ+−λ)(λ−λ−)
λ, (1)
withλ∈(λ−,λ+),λ±=1+1
Q±2/radicalBig
1
Q.
Providedthat,if λk> λ+thenullhypothesisisrejectedfrom
thek-th eigenvalue onwards. Hence, through a singular value
decomposition the RM approach builds up a ﬁltered correlation
matrix(see Eometal.,2009 ).
In our speciﬁc case, consider the continuous log return time
seriesriofagenericcryptocurrency iatanytimepoint t.i.e.,
rt
i=logPt
i−logPt−1
i, (2)
wherePt
iisthepriceofthecryptocurrency iattimet.
Considering a bunch of Ncryptocurrency return time series,
letCbetheN×Ncorrelationmatrixofthecryptocurrencyreturn
time series. The random matrix approach ﬁlters the correlatio n
matrix,thusobtaininganewmatrix C∗as:
C∗=V/Lambda1VT, (3)
with
/Lambda1=/braceleftbigg0λi< λ+
λiλi≥λ+
andVbeingthematrixofthedeviatingeigenvectorslinkedtothe
eigenvalueswhicharelargerthan λ+.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 2 April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 22

=== PAGE 3 ===
Giudici et al. Network Automated Cryptocurrency Portfolio Management
2.2. The Minimal Spanning Tree
In order to simplify the relationships given by the ﬁltered
correlation matrix C∗obtained from the random matrix
approach,weapplytheMinimalSpanningTreerepresentationof
thecryptocurrencyreturntimeseries.Thisisconsistentwi ththe
literature on stock similarities (i.e., Mantegna and Stanley, 1999;
Bonannoetal.,2003;SpeltaandAraújo,2012 ).
Given the ﬁltered correlation matrix obtained in the step
above, we may derive an Euclidean distance for each pairwise
correlationelementinthematrix,i.e.,
dij=/radicalBig
2−2c∗
ij, (4)
wherec∗
ijis a generic element ( i,j) of the matrix C∗, withi,j=
1,...,N. Each pairwise distance can be inserted in the so-called
distance matrix D= {dij}. The MST algorithm is able to reduce
the number of links between the assets fromN(N−1)
2toN−1
linkingeachnodetoitsclosestneighbor.Inparticular,wei nitially
considerNclusters associated to the Ncryptocurrencies and, at
eachsubsequentstep,wemergetwogenericclusters liandljif:
d/parenleftbig
li,lj/parenrightbig
=min/braceleftbig
d/parenleftbig
li,lj/parenrightbig/bracerightbig
,
withthedistancebetweenclustersbeingdeﬁnedas:
ˆd/parenleftbig
li,lj/parenrightbig
=min/braceleftbig
dpq/bracerightbig
,
beingp∈liandq∈lj.Thisprocedureisiterativelyrepeateduntil
weremainwithjustoneclusterathand.
Moreover, with the aim of explaining the evolution of
relationships evolve over time, Spelta and Araújo (2012)
proposed the so-called residuality coeﬃcient, which compares
the relative strength of the connections above and below a
thresholddistancevalue,i.e.,
R=/summationtext
di,j>Ld−1
i,j
/summationtext
di,j≤Ld−1
i,j(5)
withLbeing the highest threshold distance value ensuring
connectivity of the MST. Intuitively, the residuality coeﬃc ient
Rincreases when the number of links increases—meaning
the network becomes more sparse, and viceversa lowers with
decreasingnumberoflinks.
2.3. Network Centrality Measures
In this paper we employ of centrality measures in order
to develop a portfolio allocation that takes into account the
centrality of a node (cryptocurrency) in the system. Network
theory includes several centrality measures, such as the de gree
centrality, counting how many neighbors a node has, as well
centrality measures based on the spectral properties of graphs
(seePerra and Fortunato, 2008 ). Among the spectral centrality
measuresweremarkKatz’scentrality(see Katz,1953 ),PageRank
(BrinandPage,1998 ),hubandauthoritycentralities( Kleinberg,
1999),andtheeigenvectorcentrality( Bonacich,2007 ).In this paper we employ of the eigenvector centrality, as it
measures the importance of a node in a network by assigning
relative scores to all nodes in the network. Relative scores a re
based on the principle that being connected to few high scoring
nodes contributes more to the score of the node in question
than equal connections to low scoring nodes. In other words,
considering a generic node i, the centrality score is proportional
tothesumofthescoresofallnodeswhichareconnectedtoit, i.e.,
xi=1
λN/summationdisplay
j=1ˆdi,jxj (6)
wherexjis the score of a node j,ˆdi,jis the element ( i,j) of the
adjacency matrix of the network, λis a constant. The equation
fromabovecanberewritteninacompactformas:
ˆDx=λx (7)
whereˆDis the adjacency matrix, λis the eigenvalue of the
matrixˆD, with associated eigenvector x, a vector of scores of
dimension N, meaning one element for each node. Note that
as our networks are based on distances between returns, the
higher the centrality measure associated to a node, the more
the node behaves dissimilarly with respect to the other nodes in
thenetwork.
2.4. Portfolio Construction
Asset correlations are key items in investment theory and ri sk
measurement, in particular for optimization problems as in
the case of the widely known portfolio theory described by
Markowitz (1952) . As a consequence, correlation based graphs
are useful tool to build optimal investment strategies. In thi s
subsectionweshowhowportfolioconstructioncanbeenhanced
by means of a combination of the RMT, MST, and network
centralitymeasuresdescribedabove.
Several researches have investigated the relationship bet ween
the network structure of ﬁnancial assets and portfolio strat egies.
Thestudy( Onnelaetal.,2003 )showshowaportfolioconstructed
viaMarkowitztheoryismainlycomposedbyassetsthatlieint he
periphery of the asset network structure, i.e., outer node ass ets,
and not in its core. Pozzi et al. (2013) ﬁnd that peripheral assets
in the network yield to better performances and lower portfoli o
risk with respect to central ones. Peralta and Zareei (2016) show
that the centrality of assets within a network are negativel y
relatedwiththeoptimalweightsobtainedthroughtheMarkow itz
technique. Building on that, V`yrost et al. (2018) conclude that
asset allocation strategies including the network structu re of
ﬁnancialassetareabletoimproveaportfolio’srisk-returnpr oﬁle.
Anotherstreamofliteraturefocusedonproposingalternativ e
portfolio allocation strategies based on the network struct ure of
ﬁnancial assets. To illustrate, Plerou et al. (2002) andConlon
etal.(2007) usetherandommatrixtheorytoﬁlterthecorrelation
matrix to be inserted in the Markowitz minimization problem,
whileTola et al. (2008) add the MST obtaining improvements
withrespecttotherawmodel.
In the present context we aim to study the diﬀerences in the
risk-return proﬁles of our strategy, which includes topologi cal
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 3 April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 22

=== PAGE 4 ===
Giudici et al. Network Automated Cryptocurrency Portfolio Management
measures in the optimization problem, with respect to the
traditional Markowitz model, possibly yielding to better ri sk-
return characteristics of the portfolios. The originality o f our
approach builds on the fact that we do not only use RMT and
MSTasalternativeapproachestoquantifyriskdiversiﬁcation ,but
weemployanextensionofthetraditionalMarkowitzmethodby
includingthesetechniquesintheminimizationproblem.Ind eed,
inthepresentcasewewanttosolvethefollowingproblem:
minwwT/Sigma1∗w+γn/summationdisplay
i=1xiwi (8)
subjectto
/braceleftBigg/summationtextn
i=1wi=1
µP≥/summationtextn
i=1µi
n
wi≥0
wherewis the vector of portfolio weights, being withe weight
associated to the cryptocurrency i,/Sigma1∗is the ﬁltered variance-
covariance matrix with generic element ( i,j) represented by
σiσjc∗
i,j,γis the parameter representing the risk aversion of
the investor, xiis the eigenvector centrality associated with the
cryptocurrency i,µPindicates the return of the portfolio and µi
thereturnofthegenericcryptocurrency i.
Generally speaking, portfolios built upon the traditional
Markowitz theory are such that the risk is minimized for a
givenexpectedreturn,usingasinputtherawvariance-covari ance
matrix of returns. In our case, the methodological improveme nt
is2-fold.Firstly,wemodifytheinputvariance-covariance matrix,
which is ﬁltered by both RMT and MST. Secondly, we add a
component derived from the MST structure which relates to
an extra risk component the investor may want to control for.
Indeed, by modulating γthe investor can set its own level of
risk aversion toward systemic risk speciﬁcally, and not just to
the portfolio risk as in the Markowitz framework. As a matter
offact,beingcentralitiesinverselyrelatedwithdistanc es,asmall
valueof γyieldstoportfolioscomposedbylesssystemicallyrisky
cryptocurrencies, which generally lie in the peripheral part of
the network. Conversely, a large value of γmakes the algorithm
select more systemically relevant cryptocurrencies, meani ng
thosewhoareinthecenterofthenetworkstructure.Forthes ake
of completeness, we will test diﬀerent values of the systemic r isk
aversionparameterinthecourseofthecurrentapplication.
Starting from the cryptocurrency return time series, the ste ps
ofthealgorithmcanbesummarizedasfollows:
1. Estimationoftheﬁlteredcorrelationmatrix C∗byRMT
2. Reduction of the number of links in the ﬁltered correlation
matrixC∗byMST
3. Computation of the ﬁltered variance-covariance matrix /Sigma1∗
associatedtotheﬁlteredcorrelationmatrix C∗instep2
4. Computationoftheeigenvectorcentralities xi5. Computation of the portfolio weights by solving the
minimizationproblem:
minwwT/Sigma1∗w+γn/summationdisplay
i=1xiwis.t./braceleftBigg/summationtextn
i=1wi=1
µP≥/summationtextn
i=1µi
n
wi≥0/bracerightBigg
The weights calculation ﬁnally yields to the portfolio
returns which we use to evaluate the performance of our
allocationmethod.
3. EMPIRICAL FINDINGS
3.1. Data Description and Network
Topology Analysis
Inourempiricalapplicationweconsider10timeseriesofreturn s
referredtocryptocurrenciestradedovertheperiod14Septemb er
2017–17 October 2019 (764 daily observations). In particula r,
we consider the ﬁrst 10 cryptocurrencies in terms of market
capitalization as of 17 October 20192. To be precise, we analyze
the return time series of the following cryptocurrencies: Bi tcoin
(BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Ripple (XRP), Tether (USDT), Bitcoin
Cash (BCH), Litecoin (LTC), Binance Coin (BNB), Eos (EOS),
Stellar(XLM),Tron(TRX).
We provide some basic descriptive statistics of our data
inTable1. FromTable1one may notice that average daily
returns are all close to zero, in line with the general econom ic
theoryregardingassetreturns.However,the10cryptocurren cies
exhibitdiﬀerentstandarddeviations,meaningthatthevari ability
in returns diﬀers quite strongly among cryptocurrencies. To
illustrate,USDTistheoneshowingthelowestrelativevariab ility;
this is in line with the fact that this cryptocurrency is classi ﬁed
as stable coin, therefore its price should not deviate too
much on a daily basis. On the other hand, TRX is the one
showing the highest standard deviation; indeed, this partic ular
cryptocurrency witnessed a period of high ﬂuctuations during
the considered sample period. As far as kurtosis is concerned,
most of the cryptocurrencies exhibit values which reﬂects th e
non-Gaussian and heavy tailed behavior of their associated
distribution. This is particularly true for XLM and XRP, whose
kurtosisarerelativelylargerthantheonesoftheothertim eseries.
Tobetterunderstandthedynamicsofthecryptocurrencytime
series, we plot the normalized price series in Figures1 ,23. The
two ﬁgures conﬁrm well-known features of cryptocurrencies,
such as their overall high volatility (with TRX being the mos t
volatile),thestabilityofthestablecoin(USDT)aswellasth elow
liquiditythatsomeofthemexhibit(suchasTRX).
In order to apply the ﬁlter through RMT, we divide the
dataset into consecutive overlapping windows having a width
T=120 (4 trading months). We set the window step length
to 1 week (7 trading days), which makes up a total of 93 weekly
4-monthswindows.
2We exclude Bitcoin SV (BSV) in order to achieve a suﬃciently large timespan,
meaningamorethan2-yearstimeperiod.
3Wesplittheplotintwodiﬀerentﬁguresforscalereasons.
Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence | www.frontiersin.org 4 April 2020 | Volume 3 | Article 22

