Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Risk-Adjusted Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Portfolio Optimization: A Multi-reward Approach
Himanshu Choudhary1·Arishi Orra1·Kartik Sahoo1,2·Manoj Thakur1
Received: 6 February 2025 / Revised: 3 May 2025 / Accepted: 14 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Portfolio optimization is a widely studied topic in quantitative ﬁnance. Recent advances in portfolio optimization
have shown promising capabilities of deep reinforcement learning algorithms to dynamically allocate funds across
various potential assets to meet the objectives of prospective investors. The reward function plays a crucial role
in providing feedback to the agent and shaping its behavior to attain the desired goals. However, choosing an
optimal reward function poses a signiﬁcant challenge for risk-averse investors aiming to maximize returns while
minimizing risk or pursuing multiple investment objectives. In this study, we attempt to develop a risk-adjusteddeep reinforcement learning (RA-DRL) approach leveraging three DRL agents trained using distinct reward
functions, namely, log returns, differential Sharpe ratio, and maximum drawdown to develop a uniﬁed policy
that incorporates the essence of these individual agents. The actions generated by these agents are then fused by
employing a convolutional neural network to provide a single risk-adjusted action. Instead of relying solely on
a singular reward function, our approach integrates three different functions aiming at diverse objectives. The
proposed approach is tested on daily data of four real-world stock market instances: Sensex, Dow, TWSE, and
IBEX. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach based on several risk and
return performance metrics when compared with base DRL agents and benchmark methods.
Keywords Deep reinforcement learning ·Portfolio optimization ·Convolutional neural network ·Proximal policy
optimization ·Quantitative ﬁnance
1 Introduction
The primary goal of an investment is to determine an optimum allocation of funds into a pool of assets to obtain the
maximum possible returns at the cost of minimum potential risk. In a real-world scenario, an investor intends to
invest the available capital into various securities (mutual funds, bonds, stocks, and derivatives) to protect oneself
from market volatility. The uncertain patterns present in the stock market emphasize the necessity for a well-
informed investment strategy. Due to this uncertainty, determining the optimal proportion of securities becomes
challenging. Such a problem is often studied in ﬁnancial mathematics literature and is generally recognized as a
portfolio optimization problem. The portfolio optimization problem involves allocating the available funds among
the various securities to achieve the investor’s objectives. Two primary goals common to most investors are risk
minimization and maximization of return. Markowitz [ 1] was the one who ﬁrst deﬁned the trade-off between risk
and returns in his seminal work. Markowitz proposed the mean-variance optimization (MVO) model, using the
portfolio’s mean as return and variance as a measure of risk. This idea later opened the way for research into
portfolio optimization and appeared to be a milestone in modern portfolio theory [ 2–8]. Since the historical and
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8
0123456789().: V,-vol 123  126 Page 2 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
future stock returns do not always correlate, an efﬁcient portfolio constructed using historical returns will not be
efﬁcient at all in the future.
Advancements in machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms persuaded researchers and prac-
titioners to use modern learning systems for their capacity to analyze historical market data patterns and produce
systematic decisions in portfolio optimization [ 9–14]. Perrin and Roncalli [ 15] demonstrated the potential beneﬁts
of using ML techniques for large-scale optimization problems and provided an alternative approach to MVO forportfolio allocation. Afterward, Chen et al. [ 12] introduced a hybrid approach by combining the mean-variance
optimization model for portfolio selection and XGBoost for stock prediction. Pinelis and Ruppert [ 16] applied
two random forest algorithms to build an optimal portfolio where one model predicted the excess returns while
the other estimated the volatility. Zhang et al. [ 13] suggested a pipeline using deep-learning models that directly
optimize the portfolio weights by updating the model parameters. These algorithms necessitate labeled data asso-
ciated with particular objectives, such as regression or classiﬁcation. However, designing the appropriate labels
for ﬁnancial data is challenging, particularly within portfolio management.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm that trains an agent to act optimally in a dynamic environment to
maximize the rewards. The agent learns to take optimal steps via trial and error to accumulate maximum reward
[17]. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) incorporates DL to solve the policy while dealing with complex, high-
dimensional RL problems. For portfolio optimization problems, DRL provides a framework to allocate assets
to maximize the investment return dynamically [ 18–28]. Jeong and Kim [ 19] presented an automated trading
methodology that utilizes the deep Q-learning (DQN) [ 29] algorithm to identify the optimal number of stocks
to trade. They also addressed the overﬁtting problem of DL models by a transfer learning approach. However,
DQN can’t be employed directly for asset allocation problems due to its limitations to discrete action space.
V arious researchers [ 18,30–32] adopted a Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 33] algorithm to address the
portfolio optimization problem. Jang and Seong [ 34] employed the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
[35] method to optimize the portfolio dynamically. Liang et al. [ 21] utilized three continuous DRL algorithms,
namely Policy Gradient (PG), PPO, and DDPG for managing portfolios and proposed a novel adversarial training
approach for enhancing their training efﬁciency.
In RL, the reward function shapes the agent’s learning process and guides its behavior toward desired outcomes.
When optimizing portfolio weights using DRL techniques, the reward function is adjusted to increase portfolio
return, decrease portfolio risk, or attain alternative objectives. Most of the current approaches in the literature
incorporate portfolio returns or log returns as a reward to accomplish higher proﬁts [ 20,34,36–38]. Nonetheless,
this reward overlooks the associated risk, making it less practical. V arious studies [ 25,39,40] addressed the
portfolio optimization problem through RL by utilizing a risk-sensitive reward function. Modern portfolio managers
prioritize maximizing risk-adjusted returns over solely maximizing the returns and minimizing the risk. Aboussalah
and Lee [ 41] employed the regularized Sharpe ratio, whereas Sood et al. [ 42] utilized the Differential Sharpe ratio
(DSR) as a reward function in online learning settings.
Every reward function is signiﬁcant in the portfolio optimization problem. The choice of an adequate reward
function depends on the problem’s nature and investors’ risk appetite. However, choosing an optimal reward
function poses a challenge for a risk-averse investor seeking to maximize returns while minimizing risk or having
multiple investment goals. One possible approach is to formulate a multi-objective problem. However, there are
inherent challenges in solving this problem within a RL framework. To address the abovementioned challenges, we
propose a novel risk-adjusted deep reinforcement learning (RA-DRL) methodology that integrates DRL agents
trained with three different reward functions: (1) log return to maximize the returns, (2) DSR to enhance the
risk-adjusted returns, and (3) maximum drawdown (MDD) to manage the downside risks. Each reward function
captures the distinct aspects of the portfolio optimization and provides the relationship between risk and return as
a trade-off. RA-DRL combines the actions of these three agents by using a convolutional neural network (CNN)
and leverages their individual strengths aiming to maximize the portfolio returns with considerable risk. As CNN
training requires labeled data, we suggested a new approach that uses historical data to pre-train our RA-DRL
model in a supervised setting. By using supervised learning, we can explicitly deﬁne the desired outputs based
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 3 of 19   126 
on expert demonstrations derived from historical data. This setting allows the model to learn how to optimally
weigh the contributions of each agent, leading to a more balanced and risk-adjusted decision-making process.
By structuring the training this way, the approach enhances learning efﬁciency and ensures better generalization
to unseen market conditions. Integrating supervised learning with RL provides a novel and practical solution to
portfolio optimization, making the model more robust and effective for real-world ﬁnancial markets. The efﬁcacy
of the proposed approach is tested across four global markets: Sensex, Dow, TWSE, and IBEX, based on themost widely used measures. The empirical study showed the superiority of our proposed method when compared
against several benchmarks.
The main contributions of our paper are highlighted as follows:
1. We propose a risk-adjusted DRL (RA-DRL) framework that produces risk-adjusted returns for portfolio opti-
mization while addressing multiple diverse objectives simultaneously.
2. The methodology offers an effective way of utilizing a CNN to extract meaningful representations from diverse
actions by optimally weighing them to aggregate into a uniﬁed action.
3. We also propose a novel approach for integrating a supervised setting within a Deep RL framework for portfolio
optimization by leveraging historical data.
1.1 Organization of the Paper
The organization of the paper is as follows: Sect. 2provides a brief review of the existing literature on portfolio
optimization using DRL. Section 3outlines the problem formulation and details the proposed RA-DRL methodol-
ogy. Section 4covers the experimental setup, data description, and comparison of the proposed methodology with
base DRL models and benchmarks. Finally, Sect. 5offers concluding remarks and discusses the future implications
of the presented work.
2 RelatedWork
This section reviews the existing applications of DRL in portfolio optimization-based solutions. The applications ofRL in asset allocation may typically be divided into two parts: (1) prediction-based and (2) portfolio optimization-
based solutions. Predictive models seek to predict short-term variations in asset prices to take advantage of them
when making stock selection decisions. In contrast, portfolio optimization models prefer to concentrate on choosing
the best portfolio, as initially encouraged by Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) [ 1]. The Efﬁcient Market Hypothesis
[43] states that it is impossible to constantly beat the market by timing the stock prices. Hence, researchers often
seek to identify a group of assets that will likely outperform the market on a near-term basis rather than directly
forecasting market changes. The portfolio optimization problem was previously approached using conventional
dynamic programming methods, with various degrees of success before the introduction of RL. Brennan et al. [ 44]
utilized the risk-free rate, the long-term bond rate, and the dividend yield of the stocks to formulate the portfolio
management problem as a Markov decision process (MDP). Using the empirical data, they determined an ideal
method to distribute wealth among the asset classes, and the out-of-sample simulations supported this estimate.
According to Neuneier [ 45], dynamic programming performed as well as Q-learning in the context of the German
stock market, where it was applied for asset allocation, leveraging the artiﬁcial exchange rate as a state variable.
Moody et al. [ 46] employed recurrent reinforcement learning (RRL) to optimize the portfolio’s risk-adjusted
returns and extended their work to a direct policy optimization approach [ 47], nowadays widely known as Direct
Reinforcement. The direct reinforcement approach stands apart from dynamic programming and RL algorithms
as it does not involve estimating a value function.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for dynamic decision-making in
complex environments for a wide range of applications. Over the last several years, researchers have showcased
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123  126 Page 4 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
the effectiveness of DRL algorithms for solving the portfolio optimization problem. Lu [ 48] employed Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) along with the policy gradient method for designing a Forex trading model. The agent
exhibited the potential to manage downside risk associated with the exchange rate volatility. A model free and
policy based DRL model was effectively used for managing cryptocurrency portfolios by [ 49]. In this study, the
author established a framework that can be adapted to accommodate different variants of Deep Neural Networks.
In addition, it can linearly scale the portfolio size by employing an Ensemble of Identical Independent Evaluators(EIIE) meta-topology. Aboussalah and Lee [ 41] proposed a Stacked Deep Dynamic Recurrent Reinforcement
Learning (SDDRRL) methodology to optimize real-time portfolios. The efﬁcacy of the proposed technique is
tested on 10 different stocks chosen from various sectors of the S&P 500.
The reward function deﬁnes the agent’s goal and directs it to behave optimally. Recently researchers have
designed different reward functions to fulﬁll their investment objectives and speed learning. In their studies, [ 20,
34,36] used portfolio values or log returns as reward functions to achieve signiﬁcantly higher returns. Benhamou
et al. [ 36] formulated the traditional portfolio optimization problem into a DRL framework. They considered the
portfolio’s net performance as a reward function to bridge the gap between conventional portfolio optimization
techniques and DRL. Jiang and Liang [ 20] trained a model less CNN in a RL manner and used portfolio value as a
reward signal. By integrating a DL approach with modern portfolio theory, [ 34] proposed a DRL mechanism. This
proposed mechanism adopted the Tucker decomposition to deal with the multi-modal problem and continuously
adjusted the weights by considering the market movements. One major issue with focusing solely on portfolio
return as a reward is that it does not consider the risk when making investment decisions. Zhang et al. [ 50]
employed direct policy gradient optimization and introduced a novel cost-sensitive reward function. The authors
try to maximize cumulative returns while effectively managing associated risk costs. A novel DRL framework,
DeepTrader, proposed by [ 40] to optimize risk-return balanced policies. The proposed strategy leverages the
negative maximum draw-down as a reward function and an asset scoring unit that hierarchically represents the
temporal and spatial connections between the assets. Wu et al. [ 25] recommended a probability-based mechanism
for developing a risk prediction model. The reward function was adjusted to make the agent risk-aware by taking
the downside risk measure into account. These studies [ 25,40,50] utilized the risk-sensitive reward functions,
focus primarily on mitigating losses. While this is beneﬁcial in volatile or bearish market conditions. It may lead
to overly conservative investment strategies that fail to capture high returns during bullish trends. Recently, risk-
adjusted returns have gained immense popularity among researchers due to their power to maximize returns while
simultaneously reducing risk. Almahdi and Yang [ 39] proposed a technique that yields asset allocation weights
and buy/sell signals under a coherent risk-adjusted reward function. Y oo et al. [ 30] suggested a safety framework
for asset allocation that incorporates various dynamic asset allocation algorithms to produce risk-adjusted returns.
Additionally, a new reward function was employed by combining the three risk-adjusted rewards: Sortino ratio,
Sharpe ratio, and Calmar ratio, to optimize the PPO agent’s learning process. Sood et al. [ 42] provided an exhaustive
comparison of MVO with the model-free DRL for optimum portfolio allocation. They implemented DRL for
portfolio optimization by employing a risk-adjusted reward, namely the differential shape ratio (DSR), in online
learning settings, mentioning the same adjustments required to make MVO functional.
Although the DRL has gained popularity among researchers for portfolio optimization, most existing studies
focus on single reward functions and do not adequately consider the trade-off between return and risk. Moreover,
current studies do not effectively integrate multiple reward functions into a cohesive portfolio strategy. Thus, it
encourages to develop a strategy that encapsulates multiple facets of the stock market, integrating return maxi-
mization, risk-adjusted performance, and downside risk management to cater to the diverse objectives of investors.
3 Methodology
The portfolio optimization problem refers to dynamically redistributing capital into a pool of various ﬁnancial
assets to minimize risk while maximizing the long-term cumulative returns. Due to the sequential decision making
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 5 of 19   126 
nature of the portfolio optimization problem, Markov decision process (MDP) provides an ideal framework for
addressing such problems [ 44,51]. An MDP is deﬁned as a tuple (S,A,P,R,γ),w h e r e Sis the state space, Ais
the action space, Pis the transition probability, Ris the reward function, and γis the discount factor lie in [0,1].
A policy πis a solution to this MDP , which speciﬁes the actions π(s)performed by an agent in state s. The goal is
to determine a policy, π, over a possibly inﬁnite time horizon that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative
rewards, i.e. E/bracketleftBigg∞/summationdisplay
t=0γtR(st,at)/bracketrightBigg
by interacting with the environment.
3.1 Environment
In an RL setting, the environment represents the surroundings with which the agent interacts and learns. It consists
of the state space, the action space, and the reward function.
3.1.1 State Space
A state of the environment consists of the relevant information at the time step tthat encompasses the market
conditions, technical indicators, and other relevant factors. Speciﬁcally, the state space stincludes the covariance
matrix of the closing price of the assets and eight technical indicators (30 and 60 day simple moving averages
(SMA), moving average convergence divergence (MACD), upper and lower Bollinger bands, Relative Strength
Index (RSI), Commodity Channel Index (CCI), and Average Directional Index (ADX)) [ 52] corresponding to each
asset.
3.1.2 Actions Space
The actions are represented as an n-dimensional vector w=[w1,w 2,...,w n], with each component wisignifying
the allocation of weight to asset i, ensuring thatn/summationdisplay
i=1wi=1, with 0 ≤wi≤1. To enforce these constraints, one
can utilize the softmax activation function on an agent’s continuous actions of dimension n,w h e r e ndenotes the
number of assets in the portfolio.
3.1.3 Reward
The reward function incentivizes the agent to learn and reﬁne its policy. In this study, we utilize three diverse
reward functions to harness their respective advantages. A detailed description of these reward functions is as
follows:
1.Portfolio logarithmic returns The portfolio log return [ 20,34,37,53], denoted as r(t),i sd e ﬁ n e da st h e
logarithm of the ratio of the portfolio value at time t,Ptto the portfolio value at time t−1,Pt−1i.e.
r(t)=log/parenleftbiggPt
Pt−1/parenrightbigg
The logarithmic return measures the relative change in the portfolio value and practitioners try to maximize it.
The logarithmic return encourages the agent to maximize portfolio growth over time.
2.Differential Sharpe ratio (DSR) Most researchers and portfolio managers aim to maximize risk-adjusted
returns rather than only returns. The Sharpe ratio (SR), the ratio of the portfolio return to its standard deviation,
is the most popular metric for this. However, it is not ideal for online learning environments because it is deﬁned
over a speciﬁc time period. The DSR [ 46] is employed to counter this issue since it accesses the risk-adjusted
returns at each time step t.DSR tis derived by expanding the SR tto the ﬁrst order with respect to the adaptation
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123