Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Risk-Adjusted Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Portfolio Optimization: A Multi-reward Approach
Himanshu Choudhary1·Arishi Orra1·Kartik Sahoo1,2·Manoj Thakur1
Received: 6 February 2025 / Revised: 3 May 2025 / Accepted: 14 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Portfolio optimization is a widely studied topic in quantitative ﬁnance. Recent advances in portfolio optimization
have shown promising capabilities of deep reinforcement learning algorithms to dynamically allocate funds across
various potential assets to meet the objectives of prospective investors. The reward function plays a crucial role
in providing feedback to the agent and shaping its behavior to attain the desired goals. However, choosing an
optimal reward function poses a signiﬁcant challenge for risk-averse investors aiming to maximize returns while
minimizing risk or pursuing multiple investment objectives. In this study, we attempt to develop a risk-adjusteddeep reinforcement learning (RA-DRL) approach leveraging three DRL agents trained using distinct reward
functions, namely, log returns, differential Sharpe ratio, and maximum drawdown to develop a uniﬁed policy
that incorporates the essence of these individual agents. The actions generated by these agents are then fused by
employing a convolutional neural network to provide a single risk-adjusted action. Instead of relying solely on
a singular reward function, our approach integrates three different functions aiming at diverse objectives. The
proposed approach is tested on daily data of four real-world stock market instances: Sensex, Dow, TWSE, and
IBEX. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach based on several risk and
return performance metrics when compared with base DRL agents and benchmark methods.
Keywords Deep reinforcement learning ·Portfolio optimization ·Convolutional neural network ·Proximal policy
optimization ·Quantitative ﬁnance
1 Introduction
The primary goal of an investment is to determine an optimum allocation of funds into a pool of assets to obtain the
maximum possible returns at the cost of minimum potential risk. In a real-world scenario, an investor intends to
invest the available capital into various securities (mutual funds, bonds, stocks, and derivatives) to protect oneself
from market volatility. The uncertain patterns present in the stock market emphasize the necessity for a well-
informed investment strategy. Due to this uncertainty, determining the optimal proportion of securities becomes
challenging. Such a problem is often studied in ﬁnancial mathematics literature and is generally recognized as a
portfolio optimization problem. The portfolio optimization problem involves allocating the available funds among
the various securities to achieve the investor’s objectives. Two primary goals common to most investors are risk
minimization and maximization of return. Markowitz [ 1] was the one who ﬁrst deﬁned the trade-off between risk
and returns in his seminal work. Markowitz proposed the mean-variance optimization (MVO) model, using the
portfolio’s mean as return and variance as a measure of risk. This idea later opened the way for research into
portfolio optimization and appeared to be a milestone in modern portfolio theory [ 2–8]. Since the historical and
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8
0123456789().: V,-vol 123  126 Page 2 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
future stock returns do not always correlate, an efﬁcient portfolio constructed using historical returns will not be
efﬁcient at all in the future.
Advancements in machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms persuaded researchers and prac-
titioners to use modern learning systems for their capacity to analyze historical market data patterns and produce
systematic decisions in portfolio optimization [ 9–14]. Perrin and Roncalli [ 15] demonstrated the potential beneﬁts
of using ML techniques for large-scale optimization problems and provided an alternative approach to MVO forportfolio allocation. Afterward, Chen et al. [ 12] introduced a hybrid approach by combining the mean-variance
optimization model for portfolio selection and XGBoost for stock prediction. Pinelis and Ruppert [ 16] applied
two random forest algorithms to build an optimal portfolio where one model predicted the excess returns while
the other estimated the volatility. Zhang et al. [ 13] suggested a pipeline using deep-learning models that directly
optimize the portfolio weights by updating the model parameters. These algorithms necessitate labeled data asso-
ciated with particular objectives, such as regression or classiﬁcation. However, designing the appropriate labels
for ﬁnancial data is challenging, particularly within portfolio management.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm that trains an agent to act optimally in a dynamic environment to
maximize the rewards. The agent learns to take optimal steps via trial and error to accumulate maximum reward
[17]. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) incorporates DL to solve the policy while dealing with complex, high-
dimensional RL problems. For portfolio optimization problems, DRL provides a framework to allocate assets
to maximize the investment return dynamically [ 18–28]. Jeong and Kim [ 19] presented an automated trading
methodology that utilizes the deep Q-learning (DQN) [ 29] algorithm to identify the optimal number of stocks
to trade. They also addressed the overﬁtting problem of DL models by a transfer learning approach. However,
DQN can’t be employed directly for asset allocation problems due to its limitations to discrete action space.
V arious researchers [ 18,30–32] adopted a Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 33] algorithm to address the
portfolio optimization problem. Jang and Seong [ 34] employed the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
[35] method to optimize the portfolio dynamically. Liang et al. [ 21] utilized three continuous DRL algorithms,
namely Policy Gradient (PG), PPO, and DDPG for managing portfolios and proposed a novel adversarial training
approach for enhancing their training efﬁciency.
In RL, the reward function shapes the agent’s learning process and guides its behavior toward desired outcomes.
When optimizing portfolio weights using DRL techniques, the reward function is adjusted to increase portfolio
return, decrease portfolio risk, or attain alternative objectives. Most of the current approaches in the literature
incorporate portfolio returns or log returns as a reward to accomplish higher proﬁts [ 20,34,36–38]. Nonetheless,
this reward overlooks the associated risk, making it less practical. V arious studies [ 25,39,40] addressed the
portfolio optimization problem through RL by utilizing a risk-sensitive reward function. Modern portfolio managers
prioritize maximizing risk-adjusted returns over solely maximizing the returns and minimizing the risk. Aboussalah
and Lee [ 41] employed the regularized Sharpe ratio, whereas Sood et al. [ 42] utilized the Differential Sharpe ratio
(DSR) as a reward function in online learning settings.
Every reward function is signiﬁcant in the portfolio optimization problem. The choice of an adequate reward
function depends on the problem’s nature and investors’ risk appetite. However, choosing an optimal reward
function poses a challenge for a risk-averse investor seeking to maximize returns while minimizing risk or having
multiple investment goals. One possible approach is to formulate a multi-objective problem. However, there are
inherent challenges in solving this problem within a RL framework. To address the abovementioned challenges, we
propose a novel risk-adjusted deep reinforcement learning (RA-DRL) methodology that integrates DRL agents
trained with three different reward functions: (1) log return to maximize the returns, (2) DSR to enhance the
risk-adjusted returns, and (3) maximum drawdown (MDD) to manage the downside risks. Each reward function
captures the distinct aspects of the portfolio optimization and provides the relationship between risk and return as
a trade-off. RA-DRL combines the actions of these three agents by using a convolutional neural network (CNN)
and leverages their individual strengths aiming to maximize the portfolio returns with considerable risk. As CNN
training requires labeled data, we suggested a new approach that uses historical data to pre-train our RA-DRL
model in a supervised setting. By using supervised learning, we can explicitly deﬁne the desired outputs based
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 3 of 19   126 
on expert demonstrations derived from historical data. This setting allows the model to learn how to optimally
weigh the contributions of each agent, leading to a more balanced and risk-adjusted decision-making process.
By structuring the training this way, the approach enhances learning efﬁciency and ensures better generalization
to unseen market conditions. Integrating supervised learning with RL provides a novel and practical solution to
portfolio optimization, making the model more robust and effective for real-world ﬁnancial markets. The efﬁcacy
of the proposed approach is tested across four global markets: Sensex, Dow, TWSE, and IBEX, based on themost widely used measures. The empirical study showed the superiority of our proposed method when compared
against several benchmarks.
The main contributions of our paper are highlighted as follows:
1. We propose a risk-adjusted DRL (RA-DRL) framework that produces risk-adjusted returns for portfolio opti-
mization while addressing multiple diverse objectives simultaneously.
2. The methodology offers an effective way of utilizing a CNN to extract meaningful representations from diverse
actions by optimally weighing them to aggregate into a uniﬁed action.
3. We also propose a novel approach for integrating a supervised setting within a Deep RL framework for portfolio
optimization by leveraging historical data.
1.1 Organization of the Paper
The organization of the paper is as follows: Sect. 2provides a brief review of the existing literature on portfolio
optimization using DRL. Section 3outlines the problem formulation and details the proposed RA-DRL methodol-
ogy. Section 4covers the experimental setup, data description, and comparison of the proposed methodology with
base DRL models and benchmarks. Finally, Sect. 5offers concluding remarks and discusses the future implications
of the presented work.
2 RelatedWork
This section reviews the existing applications of DRL in portfolio optimization-based solutions. The applications ofRL in asset allocation may typically be divided into two parts: (1) prediction-based and (2) portfolio optimization-
based solutions. Predictive models seek to predict short-term variations in asset prices to take advantage of them
when making stock selection decisions. In contrast, portfolio optimization models prefer to concentrate on choosing
the best portfolio, as initially encouraged by Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) [ 1]. The Efﬁcient Market Hypothesis
[43] states that it is impossible to constantly beat the market by timing the stock prices. Hence, researchers often
seek to identify a group of assets that will likely outperform the market on a near-term basis rather than directly
forecasting market changes. The portfolio optimization problem was previously approached using conventional
dynamic programming methods, with various degrees of success before the introduction of RL. Brennan et al. [ 44]
utilized the risk-free rate, the long-term bond rate, and the dividend yield of the stocks to formulate the portfolio
management problem as a Markov decision process (MDP). Using the empirical data, they determined an ideal
method to distribute wealth among the asset classes, and the out-of-sample simulations supported this estimate.
According to Neuneier [ 45], dynamic programming performed as well as Q-learning in the context of the German
stock market, where it was applied for asset allocation, leveraging the artiﬁcial exchange rate as a state variable.
Moody et al. [ 46] employed recurrent reinforcement learning (RRL) to optimize the portfolio’s risk-adjusted
returns and extended their work to a direct policy optimization approach [ 47], nowadays widely known as Direct
Reinforcement. The direct reinforcement approach stands apart from dynamic programming and RL algorithms
as it does not involve estimating a value function.
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has emerged as a powerful paradigm for dynamic decision-making in
complex environments for a wide range of applications. Over the last several years, researchers have showcased
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123  126 Page 4 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
the effectiveness of DRL algorithms for solving the portfolio optimization problem. Lu [ 48] employed Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) along with the policy gradient method for designing a Forex trading model. The agent
exhibited the potential to manage downside risk associated with the exchange rate volatility. A model free and
policy based DRL model was effectively used for managing cryptocurrency portfolios by [ 49]. In this study, the
author established a framework that can be adapted to accommodate different variants of Deep Neural Networks.
In addition, it can linearly scale the portfolio size by employing an Ensemble of Identical Independent Evaluators(EIIE) meta-topology. Aboussalah and Lee [ 41] proposed a Stacked Deep Dynamic Recurrent Reinforcement
Learning (SDDRRL) methodology to optimize real-time portfolios. The efﬁcacy of the proposed technique is
tested on 10 different stocks chosen from various sectors of the S&P 500.
The reward function deﬁnes the agent’s goal and directs it to behave optimally. Recently researchers have
designed different reward functions to fulﬁll their investment objectives and speed learning. In their studies, [ 20,
34,36] used portfolio values or log returns as reward functions to achieve signiﬁcantly higher returns. Benhamou
et al. [ 36] formulated the traditional portfolio optimization problem into a DRL framework. They considered the
portfolio’s net performance as a reward function to bridge the gap between conventional portfolio optimization
techniques and DRL. Jiang and Liang [ 20] trained a model less CNN in a RL manner and used portfolio value as a
reward signal. By integrating a DL approach with modern portfolio theory, [ 34] proposed a DRL mechanism. This
proposed mechanism adopted the Tucker decomposition to deal with the multi-modal problem and continuously
adjusted the weights by considering the market movements. One major issue with focusing solely on portfolio
return as a reward is that it does not consider the risk when making investment decisions. Zhang et al. [ 50]
employed direct policy gradient optimization and introduced a novel cost-sensitive reward function. The authors
try to maximize cumulative returns while effectively managing associated risk costs. A novel DRL framework,
DeepTrader, proposed by [ 40] to optimize risk-return balanced policies. The proposed strategy leverages the
negative maximum draw-down as a reward function and an asset scoring unit that hierarchically represents the
temporal and spatial connections between the assets. Wu et al. [ 25] recommended a probability-based mechanism
for developing a risk prediction model. The reward function was adjusted to make the agent risk-aware by taking
the downside risk measure into account. These studies [ 25,40,50] utilized the risk-sensitive reward functions,
focus primarily on mitigating losses. While this is beneﬁcial in volatile or bearish market conditions. It may lead
to overly conservative investment strategies that fail to capture high returns during bullish trends. Recently, risk-
adjusted returns have gained immense popularity among researchers due to their power to maximize returns while
simultaneously reducing risk. Almahdi and Yang [ 39] proposed a technique that yields asset allocation weights
and buy/sell signals under a coherent risk-adjusted reward function. Y oo et al. [ 30] suggested a safety framework
for asset allocation that incorporates various dynamic asset allocation algorithms to produce risk-adjusted returns.
Additionally, a new reward function was employed by combining the three risk-adjusted rewards: Sortino ratio,
Sharpe ratio, and Calmar ratio, to optimize the PPO agent’s learning process. Sood et al. [ 42] provided an exhaustive
comparison of MVO with the model-free DRL for optimum portfolio allocation. They implemented DRL for
portfolio optimization by employing a risk-adjusted reward, namely the differential shape ratio (DSR), in online
learning settings, mentioning the same adjustments required to make MVO functional.
Although the DRL has gained popularity among researchers for portfolio optimization, most existing studies
focus on single reward functions and do not adequately consider the trade-off between return and risk. Moreover,
current studies do not effectively integrate multiple reward functions into a cohesive portfolio strategy. Thus, it
encourages to develop a strategy that encapsulates multiple facets of the stock market, integrating return maxi-
mization, risk-adjusted performance, and downside risk management to cater to the diverse objectives of investors.
3 Methodology
The portfolio optimization problem refers to dynamically redistributing capital into a pool of various ﬁnancial
assets to minimize risk while maximizing the long-term cumulative returns. Due to the sequential decision making
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 5 of 19   126 
nature of the portfolio optimization problem, Markov decision process (MDP) provides an ideal framework for
addressing such problems [ 44,51]. An MDP is deﬁned as a tuple (S,A,P,R,γ),w h e r e Sis the state space, Ais
the action space, Pis the transition probability, Ris the reward function, and γis the discount factor lie in [0,1].
A policy πis a solution to this MDP , which speciﬁes the actions π(s)performed by an agent in state s. The goal is
to determine a policy, π, over a possibly inﬁnite time horizon that maximizes the expected discounted cumulative
rewards, i.e. E/bracketleftBigg∞/summationdisplay
t=0γtR(st,at)/bracketrightBigg
by interacting with the environment.
3.1 Environment
In an RL setting, the environment represents the surroundings with which the agent interacts and learns. It consists
of the state space, the action space, and the reward function.
3.1.1 State Space
A state of the environment consists of the relevant information at the time step tthat encompasses the market
conditions, technical indicators, and other relevant factors. Speciﬁcally, the state space stincludes the covariance
matrix of the closing price of the assets and eight technical indicators (30 and 60 day simple moving averages
(SMA), moving average convergence divergence (MACD), upper and lower Bollinger bands, Relative Strength
Index (RSI), Commodity Channel Index (CCI), and Average Directional Index (ADX)) [ 52] corresponding to each
asset.
3.1.2 Actions Space
The actions are represented as an n-dimensional vector w=[w1,w 2,...,w n], with each component wisignifying
the allocation of weight to asset i, ensuring thatn/summationdisplay
i=1wi=1, with 0 ≤wi≤1. To enforce these constraints, one
can utilize the softmax activation function on an agent’s continuous actions of dimension n,w h e r e ndenotes the
number of assets in the portfolio.
3.1.3 Reward
The reward function incentivizes the agent to learn and reﬁne its policy. In this study, we utilize three diverse
reward functions to harness their respective advantages. A detailed description of these reward functions is as
follows:
1.Portfolio logarithmic returns The portfolio log return [ 20,34,37,53], denoted as r(t),i sd e ﬁ n e da st h e
logarithm of the ratio of the portfolio value at time t,Ptto the portfolio value at time t−1,Pt−1i.e.
r(t)=log/parenleftbiggPt
Pt−1/parenrightbigg
The logarithmic return measures the relative change in the portfolio value and practitioners try to maximize it.
The logarithmic return encourages the agent to maximize portfolio growth over time.
2.Differential Sharpe ratio (DSR) Most researchers and portfolio managers aim to maximize risk-adjusted
returns rather than only returns. The Sharpe ratio (SR), the ratio of the portfolio return to its standard deviation,
is the most popular metric for this. However, it is not ideal for online learning environments because it is deﬁned
over a speciﬁc time period. The DSR [ 46] is employed to counter this issue since it accesses the risk-adjusted
returns at each time step t.DSR tis derived by expanding the SR tto the ﬁrst order with respect to the adaptation
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123  126 Page 6 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
rate(η):SR t≈SR t−1+ηDSR t|η=0+O(η2)and formulated as follows:
DSR t≡d
dηSR t=Yt−1/Delta1Xt−1
2Xt−1/Delta1Yt
(Yt−1−X2
t−1)3
2
where Xtand Ytrepresent the exponential moving averages of the 1stand 2ndorder moments of the return rt,
respectively, with
Xt=Xt−1+η/Delta1 Xt=Xt−1+η(rt−Xt−1)
Yt=Yt−1+η/Delta1 Yt=Yt−1+η(r2
t−Yt−1).
The initial values for the quantities Xtand Ytare X0=Y0=0. As there are nearly 252 trading days in a year, the
adaptation rate is η≈1
252. DSR ensures that the agent prioritizes risk-adjusted returns instead of merely focusing
on high returns, which could be volatile and unsustainable.
3.Maximum drawdown (MDD) The MDD [ 54] offers an ideal way to capture the risk throughout the entire
investment period. It quantiﬁes the largest decline from a portfolio’s peak to its lowest point, providing a clear
measure of downside risk. For time τ, MDD can be deﬁned as
MDD =maxt:τ> t/bracketleftbiggPt−Pτ
Pt/bracketrightbigg
where Ptdenotes the portfolio value at time t. We set the current portfolio value as the trough for our online
learning setting. This approach guides the agent to take actions that push the current portfolio value to the peak.MDD protects against severe portfolio losses by discouraging allocations that lead to large drawdowns.
By integrating these metrics, the reward function provides a holistic evaluation of the portfolio’s performance. It
ensuring that the agent does not overly favor the high-risk assets or ignore the downside risk. This reward function
design ensures a comprehensive approach to portfolio optimization, capturing the strengths of each metric while
mitigating their individual weaknesses. The integration of LR, DSR, and MDD enables the RL agent to develop
a more stable, risk-aware, and return-optimized policy.
3.2 Agent: Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are broadly classiﬁed into two distinct categories known as model-based
and model-free algorithms. The model-based algorithms perform an action that aims to maximize the reward
irrespective of the consequences caused by actions. On the other hand, model-free algorithms, such as Policy
Gradient and Q-learning, attempt to learn the outcomes of their actions through experiential learning. The policygradient algorithms can be highly sensitive to perturbations as minor variations in the network parameters may
lead to signiﬁcant policy changes, resulting in a substantial decline in the agent’s performance. A stochastic policy
gradient algorithm, PPO [ 33], is employed to overcome this limitation by using a clipped objective function and
restricting the updates in the policy network. PPO incorporates two different networks, Actor and Critic. The
actor-network determines the optimal policy and generates the actions based on this policy. The critic network
estimates the value function and evaluates the efﬁciency of the actions, which enables the actor to get feedback and
enhance its decision-making process. PPO strengthens the training stability of the agent and prevents excessively
large policy updates by clipping the probability ratio, which indicates the difference between the current policy
and the previous one. The objective function of PPO is deﬁned as:
L(θ)=ˆE
t/bracketleftbigg
min/braceleftbiggπθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)·ˆAt,clip/parenleftbiggπθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st),1−/epsilon1,1+/epsilon1/parenrightbigg
·ˆAt/bracerightbigg/bracketrightbigg
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 7 of 19   126 
Fig. 1 Deep reinforcement learning framework for portfolio optimization
whereπθ(at|st)
πθold(at|st)represents the likelihood ratio at time t. This ratio is clipped within the range [1−/epsilon1,1+/epsilon1],
thereby discouraging signiﬁcant deviations of the current policy from the old one and ˆAtis the advantage function,
deﬁned as ˆAπ(st,at)=Qπ(st,at)−Vπ(st), compares the effectiveness of action atto the average of other actions
taken at that particular state st.
3.3 Proposed Methodology
This study proposes RA-DRL, a risk-adjusted DRL framework for optimizing portfolio weights under risk uncer-
tainties. It leverages three DRL models trained via distinct reward functions and provides a uniﬁed framework to
serve desirable goals. In RL, the reward function deﬁnes the agent’s objective and guides learning. A risk-averse
investor could have multiple goals, such as maximizing the return, minimizing the risk, or both simultaneously. Our
study considers three investment goals: maximize the return, minimize the risk, and maximize the risk-adjusted
return. In the RL setting, these three objectives are represented by three distinct reward functions: Log return to
maximize the returns, DSR to maximize the risk-adjusted returns, and MDD to minimize the risk. Three different
PPO agents are then trained using these reward functions. Fig. 1depicts the DRL framework adopted for portfolio
optimization.
Three trained agents correspond to three distinct actions for each time step. Subsequently, these actions are
aggregated into a uniﬁed volume. A 2 DCNN layer employing a kernel size of (1,3)is then utilized to extract
meaningful representations from these stacked actions. This choice of kernel size is motivated by the objective
of assigning weights to actions associated with each of the three DRL agents, enabling a focused representation
extraction process. These extracted representations are then fed to fully connected layers to produce the ﬁnal action
or weights for the portfolio. Fig. 2illustrates the complete ﬂow of the RA-DRL methodology. These weights are
then utilized to compute the portfolio’s return. The network parameters are adjusted to minimize the difference
between this portfolio return and the ground truth. Ground truth plays a vital role in assessing model performance
and modifying parameters by providing essential feedback in the form of gradients. In this study, we propose a
novel approach that uses a supervised setting within a DRL framework. Due to the availability of an ample amount
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123  126 Page 8 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
Fig. 2 The overview of the RA-DRL methodology, where the actions generated by the base DRL agents are combined using
a CNN layer. Then, fully connected layers are utilized to produce the risk-adjusted portfolio weights
of historical data during the training phase, we compute the weights of the portfolio assets using the following:
wi,t=eρi,t×c
/summationtext
ieρi,t×c(1)
where cis a constant that takes values from 1 to 5 and ρi,tis the percentage change in the price of ithstock at
time t. The choice of this formulation for calculating portfolio weights is motivated from [ 55]. These weights are
required to calculate the portfolio return using historical returns, which acts as the ground truth for training our
proposed methodology.
4 Experiments
In this section, we provide a detailed experimental illustration of the experiments to exhibit the superiority of theproposed RA-DRL methodology against the base DRL agents and benchmarks.
4.1 Data Description
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed methodology for solving the portfolio optimization problem, weselected the following four distinct stock markets: (1) Sensex from India, (2) Dow from the USA, (3) TWSE from
Taiwan, and 4 .IBEX from Spain. For each market instance, we are taking daily data of each market’s top 30 stocks
according to the market capitalization from 01 /01/2011 to 31 /03/2024. During this period, data for only 29 and
28 stocks out of 30 are available for Dow and IBEX, respectively. For Sensex and TWSE, the data for all 30 stocks
is available. The dataset consists of Open, High, Low, and Close prices collected from Yahoo Finance . In-sample
data from 01 /01/2011 to 31 /12/2020 is utilized for training the PPO agents, and their trading performance is
assessed on out-of-sample data spanning from 01 /01/2021 to 31 /03/2024.
4.2 Experimental Setup
All the empirical studies were conducted in the same environment settings. For tuning the model’s hyperparameters,
Bayesian optimization [ 56] is utilized on 10% of the training data. For this purpose, we leveraged a Python module
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  Page 9 of 19   126 
Fig. 3 Visual representation of the hybrid CNN-MLP
architecture ( ndenotes the number of stocks in the
portfolio)
Table 1 Parameters setting for experimentParameter Range
Hidden layers [1,8]
Hidden layers dim [2,512]
Learning rate [10−8,10−1]
Discount factor ( γ) [0,1]
Activation function [Relu, Sigmoid, Tanh]Dropout rate [0,0.5]
Entropy coefﬁcient [0.01,0.1]
V alue function coefﬁcient [0.5,1]
PPO epochs [5,50]
/epsilon1-clip 0 .2
No of episodes 500
known as Hyperopt . The range of hyperparameters picked based on empirical studies [ 33,57,58] for all three
agents is reported in Table 1. A visual representation of the hybrid CNN-MLP architecture employed for the
supervised training of the RA-DRL framework is presented in Fig. 3. The transaction cost at time step tcan be
calculated as δt=β×Pt×|wt−wt−1|. Based on the historical studies [ 59,60], the transaction rate βis set to
0.05% for all the experiments.
4.3 Performance Metrics
We have assessed the effectiveness of our proposed approach using a range of performance metrics. Speciﬁcally,
we are employing eight widely recognized risk and return measures for this evaluation. Annual returns (AR) and
Cumulative returns (CR) offer valuable insights into a portfolio’s long-term performance. However, they do not
account for risk. One popular approach involves utilizing the annualized standard deviation of daily returns to
gauge volatility risk. Additionally, we incorporate the Sharpe ratio (SR), Omega ratio (OR), Calmar ratio (CAR),
and Sortino ratio (SOR) to assess risk-adjusted returns. We have also applied a stability metric to review the
stability of the investment strategy. These performance metrics can be deﬁned as follows:
Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 123  126 Page 10 of 19 https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-025-00875-8  
•Cumulative return (CR) Cumulative return is the overall returns generated at the end of the trading period
and is calculated by dividing the portfolio’s cumulative wealth by its initial wealth.
•Annual return (AR) Annual return, expressed as a percentage of the initial investment amount, measures the
average return accumulated in a year.
•Sharpe ratio (SR) [61] SR measures the excess return that a trader makes per unit risk and is deﬁned as
SR=rp−rf
σp
where rpand rfare the portfolio return and risk-free rate, respectively. σpis the standard deviation of portfolio
return.
•Calmar ratio (CAR) [62] CAR measures the excess return that a trader makes relative to the drawdown risk
of the portfolio. MDD is the measure of the largest drop in the portfolio’s value from its peak to its trough.
CAR signiﬁes an investment’s ability to recover from losses and is deﬁned as
CAR =rp−rf
MDD
where MDD is the maximum draw-down.
•Sortino ratio (SOR) [63] While the Sharpe ratio considers both upside and downside risks equally, SOR
measures only the excess return that a trader makes per unit of downside risk. A downside risk is a potential
loss of money on the total investment. The Sortio ratio is deﬁned as:
SOR=rp−rf
DR
where DR is the standard deviation of downside risks.
•Omega ratio (OR) [64] OR encompasses all information associated with risk and return and measures the
probability-weighted ratio of proﬁts over losses at a particular level of expected return. The Omega ratio is
deﬁned as
OR=/integraltextb
θ(1−F(r))dr
/integraltextθ
aF(r)dr
where θis the investor-preferred return, commonly known as a threshold, and Fis the cumulative distribution
function of the return r.
•Annual volatility (A V) Portfolio volatility serves as a metric for portfolio risk, indicating the degree to which
a portfolio’s returns deviate from its average return. The annualized volatility is determined by multiplying
the standard deviation by the square root of the number of periods in a year, i.e., σp×√
T. Since there are
approximately 252 trading days in a year, we set Tequal to 252.
•Stability Stability denotes the capability of maintaining consistent trends or patterns over an extended period.
Calculating the R-squared value of a linear regression ﬁt to the cumulative log returns is a common way to
measure stability. The stability of a trading strategy is essential for investors seeking consistent and reliable
returns with continuous improvement in their investment approach.
4.4 Benchmarks Comparisons
To establish the proposed strategy’s efﬁcacy, we compare it against several standard benchmarks based on theabovementioned performance metrics. A brief description of these benchmarks is as follows:
123 Int J Comput Intell Syst         (2025) 18:126 